---
title: About John
description: Because you're probably dying to know.
---
## About John

{% include jswidgets.html %}
{{pagetoc}}

## Early Musical Life

I was born in Austin. My parents - baby boomers, teens in the ‘60s, were still
big fans of music, would see shows all the time, and had a great record
collection. From the womb, I heard artists like Bob Marley, Elvis Costello, and
Stevie Ray Vaughn play live. In our house growing up, the records of Bob Dylan,
The Beatles, and Jimi Hendrix were played in mix tapes and records around the
house, as well as blues masters like John Lee Hooker, Muddy Waters, and B.B.
King.

At some point, my parents noticed that as I sat in my little car seat, with my
tiny limbs and blonde hair, I would bang the restraining bar with my hands in
time to the music they were playing. Encouraged, I’m sure, by signs that their
love of music was being passed on, they got me a little drum set when I was
about 4 or 5 - and I loved them. Keyboard playing started around this time, too,
using a little Yamaha keyboard they had lying around, and a little portable
harmonium. I even started my record collection around this age; even though my
turntable was small and for kids, it rocked the likes of The Specials, The
Ramones, The Police, and Michael Jackson.

I wrote a few cute little songs as a kid, but it didn’t really occur to me to
play rock until I was 12 and Nirvana came out. I was a bit young for the whole
Gen X thing and never got to see Nirvana live, but the rise of what was called
“alternative” music was profoundly interesting to me and 12-year-old me started
taking music very seriously and identifying more as a musician. I started taking
drum lessons, and started to teach myself guitar out of magazines and books that
published tablature, all at the same time.

By the time I got to high school, I was in a band with three other pals and we
were covering all the grunge hits. Nirvana, Pearl Jam, The Breeders, and Urge
Overkill stand out. I was on drums, but I used to also hand-write the tablature
for the two guitar parts and the bass, and give that to the other guys so they
could play. We had actually gotten a pretty good repertoire by the end, when one
of the guitarists moved away, ending our little tribe’s run.

The next year of high school, I started getting into more obscure music. In
Tulsa, Oklahoma, there wasn’t much of a music scene, nor was there a radio
station that had its finger on the pulse of musical progress. It was pretty dry -
especially if you were underage. So I had to start with MTV, really. Alternative
Nation, 120 Minutes, and Headbanger’s Ball all gave some pointers. Then started
the magazines. First the obvious ones like Rolling Stone and Spin. Then
Alternative Press and Flipside. Then you got down to Maximumrocknroll, Punk
Planet, and hand-xeroxed zines like Catsup Plate. At the beginning I was buying
CDs at the mall. Then in the one really cool independent record store in Tulsa.
Eventually I found myself doing mail order out of zines for music that just had
a pretty good review, or had a band member in it I knew of from another band,
and it went on from there.

A great facilitator in all this was my new friendship with Brad Rose. In many
ways we were a great match. Both rock musicians, seeking music with a bit of
grit and truth. Big fans of Kurt Cobain. I played all the instruments he didn’t
play, and I also had a 4-track cassette recorder so we could make (very bad)
“albums” full of whatever music we could come up with. He introduced me to the
internet which seemed the antidote to the isolation of Tulsa, particularly
musically — and my research and discovery of new music and new friendships took
off in a new exciting direction. Most of all, whereas I had reacted to the
conservative, religious, sports-obsessed environment of Tulsa (in particular our
high school) with alienation, depression, and anxiety, Brad had reacted with
defiance. That taught me a lot. We started making a zine together called Bunnies
(named after a Pansy Division song) and selling it on school grounds. I would
have shied away from the intensely negative attention that attracted just a year
earlier, but just then I felt I had accepted that fitting in wasn’t going to
happen, so I might as well be proud to be something else. This had helped me put
Oklahoma in its place; all the confusion and isolation was a matter of being
mismatched, it wasn’t a matter of some personal deficiency. I felt free.

In other ways we were a terrible match. Both of us were full of strong musical
opinions, and stubborn, which injected a certain tension to our collaborations.
Generally things went smoothest if I just learned Brad’s songs and played
whatever instruments needed playing, and did the recording, but didn’t try to
rearrange anything, or bring up any songs I had written. Such measures would be
met with palpable reluctance. The feelings of judgement and competition can be
poisonous to a collaborative team, and begin to spill into very personal
feelings. There were two results of this tension: one was that Brad and I had an
on-and-off-again friendship. Another was that I had a bit of a filter on when I
did most of my music-making, and Brad was acting as a foil.

In many ways, I needed a foil. My love of The Beatles and the more melodic side
of rock would, in my early days, combine with my feelings of isolation, and
produce some quite embarrassing, quite emo, sickeningly immature songs that
simply didn’t need to be heard by the world. By being influenced by the more and
more progressive music I was being exposed to, and working in a situation where
I really needed to have a cool idea before I would get much in the way of
cooperation, I learned better ways of musically expressing those same feelings,
but in more subtle and interesting ways.

## Expanding beyond "Rock"

The turning point where I can remember starting to write more interesting stuff
and incorporate more diverse ideas than "loud guitar, quiet guitar, teen
feelings, GO" came when I started getting into other instruments. Mom and dad
had an old 70's Realistic/Moog synth that made all kinds of crazy sounds, and I
got my hands on some crazy effects units, like the Boss Pitch Shifter/Delay PS-3
and an Alesis Delay/Reverb rack unit, as well as an old hand-me-down
multi-effects floorboard unit by Korg that my friend Andrew sold to me. And of
course one mustn't forget the Big Muff, and in-amp effects like reverb and
tremolo on my dad's old Fender Twin amp, nor should we forget his acquiring of
an 8-track Fostex reel-to-reel machine, some decent mics, and a drum machine.
Finally, I started getting good at editing audio files and turning them into
loops.

By 1996 I had a much richer palette of ideas, due to listening to ever-weirder
music I was finding in zines, cassette compilations, and the internet, but I
also had a far richer palette of sounds I could make, now equipped with a drum
set and drum machine, bass, acoustic and electric guitars, Moog synth, old
keyboard, loops, and all kinds of effects to run all of them through. For awhile
I was exploring all this while I was working with Brad in a band called Ocasek.
Ocasek was probably the most prolific and interesting project I ever worked on
with Brad, particular But, by 1997 we were going through another of our
ridiculous fallouts. I took all my instruments, gear, and knowledge and started
a solo project called Kimaira (a Romanji approximation of the word "chimera" --
referencing the multi-headed beast I figured best approximated what I was doing,
engaging in the songwriting, performance, and production all on my own.)

I started making CD-Rs of Kimaira stuff and selling them to people online. Each
person would get a hand-made CD and I would put on it whatever I felt was
interesting at that time. Sometimes I would put old stuff, Ocasek stuff, or new
rough demos on there. Sometimes I'd do little drawings. By the time it was 1999
I had built up a pretty decent roster of songs, some of which had gotten a few
versions that I thought really refined the best ideas in that composition, and I
was getting a bit tired of hand-making all the CDs, so I did a pressing of a mix
CD of my demos called "One Volume Demos" ("Demos, Volume One" backwards) and
sold it through online distributors. It quickly sold out, and I got a fair
amount of attention, including some very nice reviews online and some coverage
in Spin magazine, who gave the track "Fifty-One," the "cool song of the day"
award on their site on June 6th, 2000, as well as a 30-minute documentary
feature on me that was done for college radio station ???? (gotta remember what
this was).

A friendship I had struck up in 1996 was that of Bobby Nath from a band called
Mars Accelerator. Mars, along with bands like Pie, Creeper Lagoon, Franklin
Bruno, Simon Joyner, and Azusa Plane, were a true standout band amongst all the
stuff I had found in the scene of underground cassettes. Their 1995 demo was
absolutely incredible to me, and I had ended up writing the most ridiculous
teenage fan letter I've ever written to a band, which Bobby still has a copy of
to this day.

Over the years Mars Accelerator, who were based in Seattle, had put out a couple
studio albums but by 2000 had lost two of their founding members. I was pretty
sick of Oklahoma by this time, and I had just turned 21. The dot-com boom was
ongoing and I had been into making webpages for all my various musical endeavors
for years by that point, and Mars needed help getting a new lineup together. So
I left school before finishing and got a job as a developer at some shitty
startup, hoping to finally find a community of like-minded musicians, young
techy people, and good music.

## The move to Seattle...

After growing up loving the music of the previous generation of musicians that
had come from Seattle, it was really cool to leave Oklahoma and find myself in
the homeland of some of my old heroes in the 2000s. Culturally, so much more was
going on in Seattle. Cool clubs, places to grab food and see shows, rad little
movie theaters, and the amazing Scarecrow Video. Noticeably, I was getting over
some incredibly introverted habits I'd developed in my years of isolation.
Helping matters was that, living in Seattle, I finally felt like I could talk to
random people and have things in common with them. And so I kicked off the
2000s, finally no longer underage, in the Pacific Northwest, and did my best to
balance my new life of day jobs and musical evenings.

Whereas music had been a thing that I did in a bedroom and only shared with a
small community online, there were actually some very good bands getting
together and playing right in my city - no internet connection required! I
hadn't gotten to Seattle soon enough to join Mars Accelerator, who (being
amazing) had already attracted a full roster of musicians by mid-2000. But I
started to see a lot more shows and think about what I would need (in terms of
gear, a lineup, and just as a person) to finally do music in front of people --
not in my room, but on a stage.

It took a couple years of building up to it -- getting a decent amp and effects
pedals, solidifying my musical ideas, and auditioning a bunch of random people
who responded to my classified ads -- but eventually I had the lineup for a band
that was going to take the best of my old Kimaira stuff, and the stuff I had
been writing since, and turn it into something more broadly presentable and fun
to play live. I named the project Terrene, meaning "of the earth," or "mundane."
I enjoyed the feel of the world - ethereal, and placing our ordinary existence
in the context of the entire universe, but ultimately dealing with the fact that
a "terrene" object is common, and earth-bound. It seemed to capture the duality
of a struggling musician's life -- head in the clouds, eager to identify
themselves among their favorite stars, but as of now, just a person. And I just
can't resist space metaphors -- they are great at inhabiting and expressing my
existential dread, and outer space has long been where I dream to be. Like I
belong there more than earth, really.

My first time playing a show that wasn't just a garage or a bedroom, but was on
a real stage in a bar, was at the Ballard Firehouse in Seattle, with Terrene, in
August of 2003. Anybody could have gotten the gig we got because it was horrible --
one of those "battle of the bands" shows where the winner gets something lame
and is determined by the doorman asking "who are you here to see?" The booker,
who by the way I contacted over email, booked us as the phonetically similar
"Kareen," and we were dead last at 2am on a weeknight on a bill full of high
school students' bands (complete with knitting mothers bearing Igloo ice chests
in the audience). Still, Kareen put on the best show we could and the feeling of
performing the music that had been so private and sacred to me for so long (in
front of what crowd was left) was such a rush that at time I was actually
crying, feeling utterly overwhelmed.

After spending a year rehearsing twice a week, and getting the lineup settled,
Terrene (then: Jimmy Gilbertson on drums, Daniel Gould on bass, Justin McVicker
on guitar, and me on vocals and guitar) started thinking about recording. I had
my old Kimaira and Ocasek demos, and put together a few more with Jimmy playing
drums on the four track. And I had a few home-recorded things as well. Put
together, there were some 30 songs to choose from, should we want to do an
album. To do an album though, I thought it was a good idea to have a demo so we
could attract a producer and a label to help put it together and get it out, so
we did a quick 4-song demo at the house of one Bobby Nath, my friend and the
lead singer and one of the guitarists for Mars Accelerator.

## Recording Terrene's *The Indifferent Universe* with Phil Ek

I sent the demo to Phil Ek, who I greatly admire as a producer. At the time it
made a great amount of sense; I viewed much of what made my stuff fun to listen
to as being derived from the layers of texture, particularly varying degrees of
distance in guitar (a spectrum that runs from far away/heavily-verbed out on one
end, to in-your-face and trebly/jangly on the other). Phil's work with Built to
Spill (particularly on *Keep it Like a Secret* and *Perfect From Now On*) is
some of the finest guitar engineering ever put to tape, and I was dancing in the
hall when I got the email back that said he was into the demo ("really good
poppy stuff," as he called it) and was down to record an album with us at the
legendary Avast! studios in Seattle.

Our live shows during this time were also getting better. We were playing with
great local bands like Welcome, Pomeranian, and Black Nite Crash, as well as
touring acts like Arco, Minmae, and Of Montreal. At our gig with Of Montreal at
the Sunset Tavern, Kevin swapped CDs with us -- his *Satanic Panic in the Attic*
for our... er, demo CD. "We try to do the drone thing every once in awhile, but
damn you guys do it for real," he said.

We were between sessions with Phil Ek at that time and things weren't going as
peachy as I had hoped they would. It turns out a big secret to Built to Spill's
sound on *Keep it Like a Secret* is having a major label budget, and having a
good variety of amps to try out that give the songs lots of tonal variation. And
maybe, just being a more polished / ready to rumble band had a lot to do with
it. In my defense I knew that we were green, so of the 30ish songs we had in our
repertoire, I picked the 10 that were the most "rudimentary," musically. "I'll
give us room to grow," I thought. But as it turns out, having pet ideas that you
aren't doing yet is antithetical to the process of true creation; it's holding
back, really. If you asked me now, I would say, "Do your best stuff, all the
time, and have faith that even better stuff is going to come out of you." I
hadn't done that; these songs were more safe. Some were on their 4th or even 5th
attempt at a recording, which puts in your mind a sort of... standard. There's a
sort of lifecycle to a song; in the beginning the song is infused with your
excitement and all this new enthusiasm you have for the possibilities that this
recently birthed idea is offering, and at the end it has failed a great number
of these possibilities and you are mostly papering up the cracks in your own
ability to execute on the version of the idea that worked best. Somewhere in the
middle of the cycle is the sweet spot; the part where you are still very
enthused and ravenously cycling through approaches trying to get somewhere, but
have learned the gist of the song well enough that you're past the basics,
working on muscle memory -- mind unencumbered by the effort of mastery and
instead engrossed in navigating the route to the sounds in your head.

## Going it alone

The day after the sessions with Phil were all over, I woke up and started
sobbing. After all that buildup, all that effort, all that rehearsal and all the
money, I knew I had not creating something that was up to snuff. I listened to
our mixes and felt utter despair. I knew it was not Phil's fault. He had
delivered 10 songs to our best ability to play them with the equipment and time
we had. But I just listened to the songs -- vaguely interesting, potential
obvious, but not at all reaching the heights I knew the music was capable of.
Whether driven by the "pet idea" fallacy of there being such a height, or the
disconnect I had created by choosing our more rudimentary offerings versus what
I was really capable of, what I heard playing back at me was just not music I
was proud of, or had set out to do. But I had the Pro-Tools masters...

Thus began a 2-year-long process during which I built up more of a home studio
so I could crack open the Pro-Tools files, and fix the record. I replaced
vocals. I added layer upon layer of guitar. I added sound pastiches with
recordings from my answering machine. I added xylophones, and ran them
backwards. I added videogame samples (of course). And, as the momentum within
the band ground to a halt with me doing all this, the lineup slowly dwindled
away until I was the sole member of the project. My girlfriend left me too. I
had isolated myself once again. And the nights working on the record to make it
better were long. I had set up a desk in my cold, damp basement, keeping warm
with blankets and wiping my sniffly nose as I exported a new mix again. Again.
And again.

Before absolutely everyone had split, I managed to shoot two videos, syncing the
performances to rough mixes at the time, for "Fifty-One" and "Unwelcome," and
work on these probably also prolonged things by quite a lot. But I wanted that
parallel track running so they'd be done alongside the record.

The end result was *The Indifferent Universe*, an album that had the weird
distinction of being both home and studio recorded, Phil Ek produced and
re-produced by me afterwards, of a band that was now a solo project, full of
rudimentary songs that had been layered and relayered into Pet-Sounds-like
complexity but with none of the compositional maturity, that, despite being the
result of a very lonely and cold person exporting mixes in his basement, was
described as "overproduced" in its most favorable reviews. But, full of
contradictions as it was, and as unremarkable the songwriting on the display in
that record might have been, after two long, cold years, I could at last listen
back to it and feel that "yes, these are the best versions of these songs. I can
share these now."

The videos turned out to be a great idea. I had shot Fifty-One during a roadtrip
of the West coast, starting in SoCal and ending in Seattle. I shot in places I
had no permission by saying that I was a "film student." I looked like a
protestor, given that the video concept was that I was holding aloft signs, each
with a single lyric from the song, in locations that exemplified the sentiment
of that single lyric. Sort of a take on Bob Dylan's famous short for
*Subterranean Homesick Blues*, which I went ahead and referenced in the video's
sole black and white shot.

For *Unwelcome,* which I felt was one of the album's strongest singles, I had
our label, Wax Orchard, send the song around to video directors who sent back
treatments. There was a really stupid one where we would've been talking and
acting the whole time, (with the song, I guess, playing in the background) with
us pretending that I was a sourpuss who never smiled, and the rest of the band
shows me ~*~true joy~*~ and my big grin is like the payoff of the whole thing. I
couldn't feel that shit at all. Like, at all. If you shit that directly into my
hands, piping hot, I'd be like "did you shit yet?" And you'd be like "yeah" and
I'd be like "well that was some weak shit then I guess."

Anyway the treatment that got my attention was by The Nee Brothers, in which
they had synced various events in the video to music cues, required no talking
(because after all music videos are ironically the one place where silent
moviemaking techniques still reign supreme), and had the band going underwater,
to outerspace, fighting aliens, pirate ghost skeletons, all done in a very
attractive paper-cut-out animation style that looked great in their demo reel.
Though my acting abilities remained a barrier (I recall needing a dozen takes
just to give a convincing thumbs up in one shot), and being in a green room was
weird, the video came out great, and we enjoyed airplay on MTV2's
*Subterranean*, HBO's *Feedback*, as well as various closed-circuit outlets, and
of course online. We even won "Best Indie Video" in Yahoo!'s 2008 Video Awards --
back when Yahoo! had a video service, heh.

I toured for *The Indifferent Universe* by myself, hooking up a laptop to an
external audio interface that had eight outputs. I fed these outputs to various
amps and the house PA to create a big "band sound" and played a single guitar
and sang in the middle of this strange presentation. I went on the road for 6
weeks, playing with some truly lovely people in lovely places, like KVRX in
Austin, TX (where, in addition to playing live on the air, they let me DJ and
play some of my obscure fave music, like the old tape label stuff I grew up
with, and bands I was friends with), Union Hall in Brooklyn, and the Chinese
Theater in Denver, CO.

But, upon coming back, I was told that the label had money problems and was
folding, and after that incredibly long road and huge amount of effort (and
money), *The Indifferent Universe* was to be pulled from the shelves. I had
meant to go on to do videos for *Stereo!* and *Media Sift (Through Heart
Rises)*, but instead it was all over. The years in my basement. The weeks on
tour. The loss of so many personal relationships, was basically all for naught.

After that I wasn't musical again for a couple years...

## Mental illness, tough times, and coming back

Around 2010 I was in a rough place. I had been layed off, after moving into a
rough part of Seattle called the Central District -- the only place I could
afford to buy a house. There hadn't been any work after the big crash, so I was
tapped. The house had been broken into, the car had been stolen. I was
self-medicating with weed daily, and not in a fun way. In a "I don't give a shit
about my sucky life, let's eat a box of Fruit Roll Ups" way. And I had acquired
a new companion, which was chronic anxiety. My first panic attack was the
classic story -- I thought it was a heart attack, I couldn't catch my breath, I
went to the emergency room, and I came home with a script for Xanax.

I layed in bed one night during a panic attack and let it flow through me. I had
auditory hallucinations. I heard a voice say "ah!" (sort of like the guy waking
up from The Pear Dream) with a long tail of reverb. One ear went blank and all
auditory input was replaced with the literal sound of TV static -- it sounded
exactly like it. I could feel my brain making a fist inside my head, and felt
like my skull was experiencing waves of magnetism that would've rearranged iron
filaments were they dumped on my head. My right eye twitched profoundly. When I
sat up, I felt like sediment was in my blood and it was slowly settling to the
earth, disturbed by my vertical positioning. I was so angry at how things had
turned out for me, and so scared by what my brain was doing that I thought
surely I was going to excite myself into seizures, bust an aneurysm, or have a
stroke.

But I had to rebuild. I eventually got work again as a technical writer,
creating educational materials that taught people how to make apps. I quit the
weed. And most importantly, I started writing music again.

I had accepted an offer from Mars Accelerator to finally join as a
multi-instrumentalist. I played bass, guitar, keyboards, shakers, backup vocals
-- whatever needed doing. It mostly ended up being guitar, which forced me to
massively step up my guitar game. Mars' music is full of tone changes, tempo
changes, and diving deep into your effects units on a hair trigger. In order to
pull that off, I had to use my job money to redo my rig to be MIDI-controlled
(so that with one foot press, I could activate 3 pedals, and switch to preset
#23 on such and such unit, etc). Mars' music was also harder than Terrene's --
much more screaming and distortion, which was music I had listened to all my
life but had never made.

With my new experiences, new influences, and new gear, the new songs I was
writing came out in a way I didn't expect. I found myself vacillating between
anger and fear in real life and so too did the music, which would sound
alternatingly full of rage or full of anxiety and despair. I tried to counter
that consciously, because it scared me a little that it was coming out of me
that way, but even that song (titled "Get Beyond") ended up having a much more
fuzzy, distored feel than any of Terrene's stuff.

## The current project

I decided that if I was going to get back into recording my own stuff, I needed
to take a few lessons with me that I had learned.

1. No pet ideas. Do the best version of your best stuff and get rid of
everything else.
2. No overproducing. I don't need to go to a studio, because
that's where you go to make music "how it's supposed to sound." All of my
favorite albums have a more distinctive sound that isn't about ultimate fidelity
so much as conveying a feeling with the "shape" of the recording. After all, to
me, the way that a song was recorded and is presented is as much a part of the
experience of listening to it as the actual music.
3. Strike the right
simplicity/complexity balance. Never choose to do dumb simple songs, reward deep
listening, and eschew well-tread chord change progressions wherever possible. On
the other hand, if a 5-piece band can't recreate what you're doing, you're
probably fucking up.
4. I'm doing it myself. I would play all the instruments
and record and produce the music at home. I would also self-release the music.
This basically was to remove dependencies on people who weren't as invested in
it as I was, to shield the music from being vulnerable to a record label's
commercial issues during a tough time in the music industry, and to make taking
awhile to develop the sound of each song a "cost-free" endeavor rather than one
that made everyone sweat because time and money were so limited.
5. I would make
the music an [open source project](/opensource/) and invite people to remix and
sample the music to their heart's content, as well as listen to the different
pieces of the music individually and hear all the flaws, nuance, etc that you
hear when you solo out one aspect of a given track.

And that's how the project operates.
